readMe.md, before:

# Angular

### Contents

1. [Angular Framework](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#1-angular-framework) </br>
2. [Components & Modules](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#2-components--modules) </br>
3. [Data Binding](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#3-data-binding) </br>
4. [Directives](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#4-directives) </br>
5. [Decorator & Pipes](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#5-decorator--pipes) </br>
6. [Services & Dependency Injection](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#6-services--dependency-injection) </br>
7. [Lifecycle Hooks](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#7-lifecycle-hooks) </br>
8. [Observable / HttpClient/ RxJS](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#8-observable--httpclient-rxjs) </br>
9. [Typescript Basics](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#9-typescript-basics) </br>

---

## 1. Angular Framework

#### 1.1 What is Angular?

-   A component based framework for building structured, scalable and SPA for client side.

#### 1.2 What are Angular advantages?

-   Component based architecture.
-   Cross platform & open source.
-   Reuseable code (services).

#### 1.3 Angular vs AngularJs?

![Angular vs AngularJs](assets/angular%20vs%20angularJs.png)

#### 1.4 What's NPM?

-   Node Package Management. manage open source packages that can be used in project.

#### 1.5 What's CLI tool?

-   Command line interface that use to initialize & develop Angular apps.
-   Can create components, services, modules, etc.
-   Wll automatically register the created elements also.

---

## 2. Components & Modules

#### 2.1 What're Components?

-   Basic UI building block of an Angular app.
-   Normally there are 4 files in a Angular component.
    -   CSS - Styling file. Can also be scss, sass
    -   HTML - template file.
    -   TS - file that link all the component files.
    -   spec.ts - unit test file.

#### 2.2 What's Selector & Template?

![](assets/@Component.png)

-   selector is used to identify each component uniquely.
-   Template is the HTML view of the component.

#### 2.3 What's a Module?

-   A place where you can group the components, directives, pipes and services which are related to the component.
    ![](assets/@NgModule.png)
-   **declarations** - components that the module can have.
-   **imports** - use services of other modules.
-   **providers** - _related to dependency injection_
-   **bootstrap** - which component will be bootstrapped out of declared components.

#### 2.4 How Angular app gets loaded?

1. **index.html** - Single page of the app. index.html will invoke main.js which is the JS version of Main.ts.
2. **Main.ts** - Entry point of webapp. It bootstraps the AppModule ro run on the browser.
3. **app.module.ts** - AppModule wii bootstrap AppComponent.
4. **App-component** - Final View. All other components get here.

#### 2.5 What's Bootstrapped Module & Component?

-   When Angular app starts, the first module/component to launch is the bootstrapped one. (in short - 1st to launch).

---

## 3. Data Binding

#### 3.1 What's data binding

-   A way to communicate between TS code and html view.
-   ![](assets/data%20binding%20techniques.png)

#### 3.2 What's string interpolation

-   One-way data-binding technique, transfer data from TS to HTML
    -   Only works with strings.
    -   represented inside {{ }}

```
let title="hello"; //ts

<h1> {{ title }} </h1> //html
```

#### 3.3 What's property binding

-   superset of interpolation - support all data types

```
let isDisabled=true; //ts

<input type='text' [disabled]='isDisabled'/> //html
```

#### 3.4 What's Event Binding

-   Used to handel events raised by user actions. i.e : btn click.
-   transfer from html to ts.

```
<button (click)="clickBtn()"> Click Me </button> //html

public clickBtn(){ console.log("clicked")} //ts
```

#### 3.5 What's 2 way data binding?

-   Support html to ts and ts to html same time.

```
<input [(ngModel)]="name" type="text"/> //html
<h1> {{ name }} </h1>   // real time output of change

let name="Mike"; //ts

```

---

## 4. Directives

#### 4.1 What're directives? & there types?

-   Directives are, classes that add additional behavior to elements.
-   3 types of main directives. Can create customs also.
    1. **Component**: directives with its own templates. shows 1st view.
    2. **Attribute**: change appearance & behavior of element.
        - [ngStyle]
        - [ngClass]
    3. **Structural**: change the appearance of DOM. by adding & removing.
        - \*ngIf
        - \*ngFor
        - \*ngSwitch
-   ![Directive types](assets/directive%20types.png)

#### 4.2 What's \*ngIf?

-   follows the if condition.

```
<h1 *ngIf="dataVisible"> Hello </h1>

let dataVisible = false;    //ts
```

#### 4.3 What's \*ngFor?

-   follows the For loop principle.

```
<li *ngFor="let student of studentList">
    {{ student }}
</li>

let studentList = ['Jane', 'May', 'Peter']  //ts
```

#### 4.4 What's \*ngSwitch?

-   follows the Switch case principle.

```
<ul [ngSwitch]="studentList.length">
    <li *ngSwitchCase=0> 0 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchCase=1> 1 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchCase=2> 2 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchDefault> More students </li>
</ul>

let studentList = ['Jane', 'May']  //ts
```

#### 4.5 What's [ngStyle]

-   Update Style for html element.

```
<div [ngStyle]="{'color': myColorName}"></div>

let myColorName = 'red';
```

#### 4.6 What's [ngClass]

-   Adds & removes CSS classes from an element.

---

## 5. Decorator & Pipes

#### 5.1 What's Decorator?

-   decorator store metadata about a class, method or property.
-   All decorators are represented with @ symbol.
-   ![](assets/metadata.png)

#### 5.2 What're the types of decorators?

![decorators types](assets/types-of-decorators.png)

##### 5.2.1 Class Decorator

-   @Component - marks a class as a component & provide metadata
-   @NgModule - marks a class as a NgModule & provide metadata

##### 5.2.2 Property Decorator [(View)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I317BhehZKM&t=176s)

-   @Input:

    -   Parent => Child
    -   marks a class field as input property. - Will reflect in the DOM, 'ng-reflect-InputName'

    ```
    // template
    <parent>
        <child [exampleProperty]="Data">
        </child>
    </parent>

    // Parent
    Data = "Hello world";

    // Child
    @Input
    exampleProperty: string;
    // exampleProperty: string = "Hi"; <- means, the default val is "Hi";
    ```

-   @Output

    -   Child => Parent

    ```
    // template
    <parent>
        <child [messageEvent]="receiveMsg($event)"></child>
    </parent>

    // parent
    receiveMsg($event){
        this.msg = $event;
    }

    // child
    @Output
    messageEvent = new EventEmitter<string>();

    this.messageEvent.emit("Sending msg..")
    ```

#### 5.3 What're Pipes?

-   A function that accept an input & return a transformed value.
-   ![types of pipes](assets/Pipes-types.png)

```
<h3> {{ title }} </h3>                  // Hello World
<h3> {{ title | lowercase }} </h3>      // hello world
<h3> {{ title | uppercase }} </h3>      // HELLO WORLD

```

-   **Parameterized pipe** - pipes with parameters passed.

```
{{ 123.45 | currency }}         // USD currency
{{ 123.45 | currency: 'LKR' }}  // SL currency
```

#### 5.4 What's chaining pipes?

-   A use of multiple pipes on data.

```
{{ dob | date | uppercase }}    // converting to date format, & then uppercase
```

---

## 6. Services & Dependency Injection

#### 6.1 What's Service?

-   A TS class & a reuseable code which can be used in multiple components.
-   Can be implemented with the help of Dependency Injection.
-   ![](assets/service-example.png)
-   in above example, instead of coding 'ErrorLogging' twice can create a service and pass a single instance trough the component.

#### 6.2 Creating a service

-   Using the CLI

```
ng generate service service-name
```

-   Use dependency injection when inserting service into a component.
-   <u>Using a service in a component.</u>

```
// step 01: import
import {LogginService} from 'src/services/logging-service';

// step 02: declaring in providers
providers: [LoggingService]

// step 03: pass service in constructor
constructor{
    private logginService: LoggingService
} { }


// step 04: using service
constructor{
    private logginService: LoggingService
} {
    this.logginService.LogError();
 }

```

#### 6.3 What's Hierarchical Dependency Injection?

-   Hierarchical Dependency Injection is, when you inject a service to a Node it'll be only accessible to itself & it's children. It won't be accessible for parent & siblings.
-   ![Hierarchical Dependency Injection](assets/Hirearical%20dependency%20injection.png)
-   So no need to provide the service in 'Providers' for accessible child components. But still have to pass it to the constructor.

-   **3 places** where you can declare the provider.
    1. component level: define what service
        ```
        providers: [LoggingService]
        ```
    2. in Module: define what service
        ```
        providers: [LoggingService]
        ```
    3. @Injectable in service :- define where to provide.
        ```
        @Injectable({
            provideIn: 'root'
        })
        ```

#### 6.4 What's a Provider?

-   An obj declared inside decorator, which inform that the specific service is available for injecting.
-   ![Providers declaring types](assets/Providers%20declaring%20types.png)

#### 6.5 The role of @Injectable ?

-   One service can be used by another service.
-   @Injectable decorator should placed in both services.

---

## 7. Lifecycle Hooks

#### 7.1 What're lifecycle hooks?

-   The different stages a component goes through.
    1. constructor:
    2. ngOnChanges
    3. ngOnInit
    4. ngDoCheck
    5. Child components
    6. ngOnDestroy
-   ![Component lifecycle](assets/component%20lifecycle.png)

#### 7.2 What's a constructor?

-   a method in a TS class, that gets automatically called when class being instantiated.
-   Not part of lifecycle. Run before lifecycle Hooks.
-   Used to **inject dependencies(services)** into the component.

#### 7.3 What's ngOnInit?

-   signals the activation/creation of the component.
-   Called only once.
-   by default it'll be present.

#### 7.4 ngOnInit vs Constructor

![ngOnInit vs constructor](assets/ngOnInit%20vs%20constructor.png)

---

## 8. Observable / HttpClient/ RxJS

#### 8.1 What're Asynchronous operations?

![sync vs async](assets/sync%20vs%20async.png)

#### 8.2 Promise vs Observable

-   Let's say there need to be 5 data to collect:
    -   Promise - send data once it collect all 5 data.
    -   Observable - When it receive single data it'll send it. 5 times for 5 data.
        ![Promise vs Observable](assets/Promise%20vs%20Observable.gif)
        ![Promise vs Observable](assets/Promise%20vs%20Observable.png)

#### 8.3 What's RxJS?

-   Reactive Extensions for JavaScript.
-   a library for composing async & event-based programs by using observables.
-   Observables introduced in RxJs.
-   Two main players:
    1. Observable -> stream of data
    2. Observer -> subscriber

#### 8.4 Observables

##### 8.4.1 Concept of Observable:

-   Understand these 3 concepts:

    ```
    What do we have?
    What do we want?
    When do we want it?

    ```

##### 8.4.2 What is Observable?

-   Used to stream data to multiple components.
-   Does nothing until it's subscribed.
-   use $ sign at end to specify the function will return an observable.

##### 8.4.3 Why using observables?

-   useful for event that happens overtime (key press, btn clicks, http res).
-   watches and quickly react for arrivals/emissions.
    -   What are the emissions?
        -   next - emit next item.
        -   error - error occurred don't emit further.
        -   complete - don't emit further.

##### 8.4.4 Whats subscription?

-   Obj that represent the execution of an observable.
-   Should unsubscribe the observable on destroying.

```
ngOnInit(): void {
    this.MyOb = this.productService.getProducts$().subscribe();
}

ngOnDestroy(): void{
    this.MyOb.unsubscribe();
}
```

##### 8.4.5 creating an observable:

-   Creating Observable is a 3 step process:

    1. import Observable from RxJS.
    2. Create Observable & Emit data.
    3. Subscribe the data.

    ```
    // Step 01:
    import {Observable} from 'rxjs';

    // Step 02:
    myObservable = new Observable(observer => {
        observer.next('a');
        observer.next('b');
        observer.next('c');
    })

    // Step 03:
    thi.myObservable.subscribe((val) => {
        console.log(val);                   // a -> b -> c
    })
    ```

-   Parts of observable: (common observable)
    ![Parts of observable](assets/parts%20of%20observable.png)

#### 8.5 Observable Patterns:

1. Declarative data access pattern
2. Retrieve on action pattern
3. Shape on action pattern
4. Retrieve related data pattern

#### 8.6 What's the role of HttpClient?

-   A build-in service class in Angular, that perform http requests.
    ![httpClient code](assets/HttpClient%20code.png)

---

## 9. Typescript Basics

#### 9.1 What is TS?

-   Strongly typed language.
-   Superset of JS.
-   detect errors at compile time.
-   Follows OOP.
    ![TS vs JS](assets/TS%20vs%20JS.png)

#### 9.2 let vs var

-   let: accessible only inside the scope.
-   var: accessible outside the scope also.

#### 9.3 What's Type assertion?

-   A technique that informs compiler about the type of the variable.

```
let myName;
let isEndChartY = (<string>myName).endsWith('y');
```

#### 9.4 What're some intermediate/advanced concepts used in TS?

##### 9.4.1 Use of 'keyof'?

-   used to obtain the union of keys from a given obj type.

    ```
    interface Person {
        name: string;
        age: number;
        location: string;
    }

    type K1 = keyof Person; // "name" | "age" | "location"
    type K2 = keyof Person[]; // "length" | "push" | "pop" | "concat" | ...
    ```

##### 9.4.2 Use of Generics?

-   Allows to create types, that explicitly don't won't to define.

    ```
    function identity<T>(arg: T): T {
        return arg;
    }
    let output1 = identity<string>("myString");
    let output2 = identity<number>( 100 );
    ```

-   Above example the 'T' would've same type throughout the function.

##### 9.4.2 Use of NULL values?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_null.php)

1. Optional Chaining: **'?.'**
    - Allows access properties that may or may not exist.
    ```
    const yardSize = house.yard?.sqft;
    ```
2. Nullish Coalescence: **'??'**

    - More like the ternary operator.
    - if null - data after ?? get executed.
    - if not null - data before ?? get executed.

    ```
    function printMileage(mileage: number | null | undefined) {
        console.log(`Mileage: ${mileage ?? 'Not Available'}`);
    }

    printMileage(null); // Prints 'Mileage: Not Available'
    printMileage(0); // Prints 'Mileage: 0'
    ```

3. Null Assertion: **'!'**
    - When you know that value won't be Null.
    ```
    function getValue(): string | undefined {
        return 'hello';
    }
    let value = getValue();
    console.log('value length: ' + value!.length);
    ```

##### 9.4.3 Use of Classes?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_classes.php)

1. Visibility:
2. ReadOnly:
3. Implement
4. Extends
5. Override
6. Abstract

##### 9.4.4 Use of Utility types?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_utility_types.php)

1. Partial
2. Required
3. Record
4. Omit
5. Pick
6. Exclude
7. ReturnType
8. Parameters

Commit message:

add sub topic pipes in observables

readMe.md, after:

# Angular

### Contents

1. [Angular Framework](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#1-angular-framework) </br>
2. [Components & Modules](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#2-components--modules) </br>
3. [Data Binding](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#3-data-binding) </br>
4. [Directives](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#4-directives) </br>
5. [Decorator & Pipes](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#5-decorator--pipes) </br>
6. [Services & Dependency Injection](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#6-services--dependency-injection) </br>
7. [Lifecycle Hooks](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#7-lifecycle-hooks) </br>
8. [Observable / HttpClient/ RxJS](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#8-observable--httpclient-rxjs) </br>
9. [Typescript Basics](https://github.com/RukshanDias/Angular#9-typescript-basics) </br>

---

## 1. Angular Framework

#### 1.1 What is Angular?

-   A component based framework for building structured, scalable and SPA for client side.

#### 1.2 What are Angular advantages?

-   Component based architecture.
-   Cross platform & open source.
-   Reuseable code (services).

#### 1.3 Angular vs AngularJs?

![Angular vs AngularJs](assets/angular%20vs%20angularJs.png)

#### 1.4 What's NPM?

-   Node Package Management. manage open source packages that can be used in project.

#### 1.5 What's CLI tool?

-   Command line interface that use to initialize & develop Angular apps.
-   Can create components, services, modules, etc.
-   Wll automatically register the created elements also.

---

## 2. Components & Modules

#### 2.1 What're Components?

-   Basic UI building block of an Angular app.
-   Normally there are 4 files in a Angular component.
    -   CSS - Styling file. Can also be scss, sass
    -   HTML - template file.
    -   TS - file that link all the component files.
    -   spec.ts - unit test file.

#### 2.2 What's Selector & Template?

![](assets/@Component.png)

-   selector is used to identify each component uniquely.
-   Template is the HTML view of the component.

#### 2.3 What's a Module?

-   A place where you can group the components, directives, pipes and services which are related to the component.
    ![](assets/@NgModule.png)
-   **declarations** - components that the module can have.
-   **imports** - use services of other modules.
-   **providers** - _related to dependency injection_
-   **bootstrap** - which component will be bootstrapped out of declared components.

#### 2.4 How Angular app gets loaded?

1. **index.html** - Single page of the app. index.html will invoke main.js which is the JS version of Main.ts.
2. **Main.ts** - Entry point of webapp. It bootstraps the AppModule ro run on the browser.
3. **app.module.ts** - AppModule wii bootstrap AppComponent.
4. **App-component** - Final View. All other components get here.

#### 2.5 What's Bootstrapped Module & Component?

-   When Angular app starts, the first module/component to launch is the bootstrapped one. (in short - 1st to launch).

---

## 3. Data Binding

#### 3.1 What's data binding

-   A way to communicate between TS code and html view.
-   ![](assets/data%20binding%20techniques.png)

#### 3.2 What's string interpolation

-   One-way data-binding technique, transfer data from TS to HTML
    -   Only works with strings.
    -   represented inside {{ }}

```
let title="hello"; //ts

<h1> {{ title }} </h1> //html
```

#### 3.3 What's property binding

-   superset of interpolation - support all data types

```
let isDisabled=true; //ts

<input type='text' [disabled]='isDisabled'/> //html
```

#### 3.4 What's Event Binding

-   Used to handel events raised by user actions. i.e : btn click.
-   transfer from html to ts.

```
<button (click)="clickBtn()"> Click Me </button> //html

public clickBtn(){ console.log("clicked")} //ts
```

#### 3.5 What's 2 way data binding?

-   Support html to ts and ts to html same time.

```
<input [(ngModel)]="name" type="text"/> //html
<h1> {{ name }} </h1>   // real time output of change

let name="Mike"; //ts

```

---

## 4. Directives

#### 4.1 What're directives? & there types?

-   Directives are, classes that add additional behavior to elements.
-   3 types of main directives. Can create customs also.
    1. **Component**: directives with its own templates. shows 1st view.
    2. **Attribute**: change appearance & behavior of element.
        - [ngStyle]
        - [ngClass]
    3. **Structural**: change the appearance of DOM. by adding & removing.
        - \*ngIf
        - \*ngFor
        - \*ngSwitch
-   ![Directive types](assets/directive%20types.png)

#### 4.2 What's \*ngIf?

-   follows the if condition.

```
<h1 *ngIf="dataVisible"> Hello </h1>

let dataVisible = false;    //ts
```

#### 4.3 What's \*ngFor?

-   follows the For loop principle.

```
<li *ngFor="let student of studentList">
    {{ student }}
</li>

let studentList = ['Jane', 'May', 'Peter']  //ts
```

#### 4.4 What's \*ngSwitch?

-   follows the Switch case principle.

```
<ul [ngSwitch]="studentList.length">
    <li *ngSwitchCase=0> 0 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchCase=1> 1 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchCase=2> 2 students </li>
    <li *ngSwitchDefault> More students </li>
</ul>

let studentList = ['Jane', 'May']  //ts
```

#### 4.5 What's [ngStyle]

-   Update Style for html element.

```
<div [ngStyle]="{'color': myColorName}"></div>

let myColorName = 'red';
```

#### 4.6 What's [ngClass]

-   Adds & removes CSS classes from an element.

---

## 5. Decorator & Pipes

#### 5.1 What's Decorator?

-   decorator store metadata about a class, method or property.
-   All decorators are represented with @ symbol.
-   ![](assets/metadata.png)

#### 5.2 What're the types of decorators?

![decorators types](assets/types-of-decorators.png)

##### 5.2.1 Class Decorator

-   @Component - marks a class as a component & provide metadata
-   @NgModule - marks a class as a NgModule & provide metadata

##### 5.2.2 Property Decorator [(View)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I317BhehZKM&t=176s)

-   @Input:

    -   Parent => Child
    -   marks a class field as input property. - Will reflect in the DOM, 'ng-reflect-InputName'

    ```
    // template
    <parent>
        <child [exampleProperty]="Data">
        </child>
    </parent>

    // Parent
    Data = "Hello world";

    // Child
    @Input
    exampleProperty: string;
    // exampleProperty: string = "Hi"; <- means, the default val is "Hi";
    ```

-   @Output

    -   Child => Parent

    ```
    // template
    <parent>
        <child [messageEvent]="receiveMsg($event)"></child>
    </parent>

    // parent
    receiveMsg($event){
        this.msg = $event;
    }

    // child
    @Output
    messageEvent = new EventEmitter<string>();

    this.messageEvent.emit("Sending msg..")
    ```

#### 5.3 What're Pipes?

-   A function that accept an input & return a transformed value.
-   ![types of pipes](assets/Pipes-types.png)

```
<h3> {{ title }} </h3>                  // Hello World
<h3> {{ title | lowercase }} </h3>      // hello world
<h3> {{ title | uppercase }} </h3>      // HELLO WORLD

```

-   **Parameterized pipe** - pipes with parameters passed.

```
{{ 123.45 | currency }}         // USD currency
{{ 123.45 | currency: 'LKR' }}  // SL currency
```

#### 5.4 What's chaining pipes?

-   A use of multiple pipes on data.

```
{{ dob | date | uppercase }}    // converting to date format, & then uppercase
```

---

## 6. Services & Dependency Injection

#### 6.1 What's Service?

-   A TS class & a reuseable code which can be used in multiple components.
-   Can be implemented with the help of Dependency Injection.
-   ![](assets/service-example.png)
-   in above example, instead of coding 'ErrorLogging' twice can create a service and pass a single instance trough the component.

#### 6.2 Creating a service

-   Using the CLI

```
ng generate service service-name
```

-   Use dependency injection when inserting service into a component.
-   <u>Using a service in a component.</u>

```
// step 01: import
import {LogginService} from 'src/services/logging-service';

// step 02: declaring in providers
providers: [LoggingService]

// step 03: pass service in constructor
constructor{
    private logginService: LoggingService
} { }


// step 04: using service
constructor{
    private logginService: LoggingService
} {
    this.logginService.LogError();
 }

```

#### 6.3 What's Hierarchical Dependency Injection?

-   Hierarchical Dependency Injection is, when you inject a service to a Node it'll be only accessible to itself & it's children. It won't be accessible for parent & siblings.
-   ![Hierarchical Dependency Injection](assets/Hirearical%20dependency%20injection.png)
-   So no need to provide the service in 'Providers' for accessible child components. But still have to pass it to the constructor.

-   **3 places** where you can declare the provider.
    1. component level: define what service
        ```
        providers: [LoggingService]
        ```
    2. in Module: define what service
        ```
        providers: [LoggingService]
        ```
    3. @Injectable in service :- define where to provide.
        ```
        @Injectable({
            provideIn: 'root'
        })
        ```

#### 6.4 What's a Provider?

-   An obj declared inside decorator, which inform that the specific service is available for injecting.
-   ![Providers declaring types](assets/Providers%20declaring%20types.png)

#### 6.5 The role of @Injectable ?

-   One service can be used by another service.
-   @Injectable decorator should placed in both services.

---

## 7. Lifecycle Hooks

#### 7.1 What're lifecycle hooks?

-   The different stages a component goes through.
    1. constructor:
    2. ngOnChanges
    3. ngOnInit
    4. ngDoCheck
    5. Child components
    6. ngOnDestroy
-   ![Component lifecycle](assets/component%20lifecycle.png)

#### 7.2 What's a constructor?

-   a method in a TS class, that gets automatically called when class being instantiated.
-   Not part of lifecycle. Run before lifecycle Hooks.
-   Used to **inject dependencies(services)** into the component.

#### 7.3 What's ngOnInit?

-   signals the activation/creation of the component.
-   Called only once.
-   by default it'll be present.

#### 7.4 ngOnInit vs Constructor

![ngOnInit vs constructor](assets/ngOnInit%20vs%20constructor.png)

---

## 8. Observable / HttpClient/ RxJS

#### 8.1 What're Asynchronous operations?

![sync vs async](assets/sync%20vs%20async.png)

#### 8.2 Promise vs Observable

-   Let's say there need to be 5 data to collect:
    -   Promise - send data once it collect all 5 data.
    -   Observable - When it receive single data it'll send it. 5 times for 5 data.
        ![Promise vs Observable](assets/Promise%20vs%20Observable.gif)
        ![Promise vs Observable](assets/Promise%20vs%20Observable.png)

#### 8.3 What's RxJS?

-   Reactive Extensions for JavaScript.
-   a library for composing async & event-based programs by using observables.
-   Observables introduced in RxJs.
-   Two main players:
    1. Observable -> stream of data
    2. Observer -> subscriber

#### 8.4 Observables

##### 8.4.1 Concept of Observable:

-   Understand these 3 concepts:

    ```
    What do we have?
    What do we want?
    When do we want it?

    ```

##### 8.4.2 What is Observable?

-   Used to stream data to multiple components.
-   Does nothing until it's subscribed.
-   use $ sign at end to specify the function will return an observable.

##### 8.4.3 Why using observables?

-   useful for event that happens overtime (key press, btn clicks, http res).
-   watches and quickly react for arrivals/emissions.
    -   What are the emissions?
        -   next - emit next item.
        -   error - error occurred don't emit further.
        -   complete - don't emit further.

##### 8.4.4 Whats subscription?

-   Obj that represent the execution of an observable.
-   Should unsubscribe the observable on destroying.

```
ngOnInit(): void {
    this.MyOb = this.productService.getProducts$().subscribe();
}

ngOnDestroy(): void{
    this.MyOb.unsubscribe();
}
```

##### 8.4.5 creating an observable:

-   Creating Observable is a 3 step process:

    1. import Observable from RxJS.
    2. Create Observable & Emit data.
    3. Subscribe the data.

    ```
    // Step 01:
    import {Observable} from 'rxjs';

    // Step 02:
    myObservable = new Observable(observer => {
        observer.next('a');
        observer.next('b');
        observer.next('c');
    })

    // Step 03:
    thi.myObservable.subscribe((val) => {
        console.log(val);                   // a -> b -> c
    })
    ```

-   Parts of observable: (common observable)
    ![Parts of observable](assets/parts%20of%20observable.png)

#### 8.5 Pipes in observables

-   Transforms each emitted item that receive.
-   Common pipeable operators: map, filter, tap, many more..
    ![Pipes in observables](assets/pipes%20in%20observables.png)
    : In above example there's no need of Observer, since we can stream dat using pipeable operators.

#### 8.6 Observable Patterns:

1. Declarative data access pattern
2. Retrieve on action pattern
3. Shape on action pattern
4. Retrieve related data pattern

#### 8.7 What's the role of HttpClient?

-   A build-in service class in Angular, that perform http requests.
    ![httpClient code](assets/HttpClient%20code.png)

---

## 9. Typescript Basics

#### 9.1 What is TS?

-   Strongly typed language.
-   Superset of JS.
-   detect errors at compile time.
-   Follows OOP.
    ![TS vs JS](assets/TS%20vs%20JS.png)

#### 9.2 let vs var

-   let: accessible only inside the scope.
-   var: accessible outside the scope also.

#### 9.3 What's Type assertion?

-   A technique that informs compiler about the type of the variable.

```
let myName;
let isEndChartY = (<string>myName).endsWith('y');
```

#### 9.4 What're some intermediate/advanced concepts used in TS?

##### 9.4.1 Use of 'keyof'?

-   used to obtain the union of keys from a given obj type.

    ```
    interface Person {
        name: string;
        age: number;
        location: string;
    }

    type K1 = keyof Person; // "name" | "age" | "location"
    type K2 = keyof Person[]; // "length" | "push" | "pop" | "concat" | ...
    ```

##### 9.4.2 Use of Generics?

-   Allows to create types, that explicitly don't won't to define.

    ```
    function identity<T>(arg: T): T {
        return arg;
    }
    let output1 = identity<string>("myString");
    let output2 = identity<number>( 100 );
    ```

-   Above example the 'T' would've same type throughout the function.

##### 9.4.2 Use of NULL values?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_null.php)

1. Optional Chaining: **'?.'**
    - Allows access properties that may or may not exist.
    ```
    const yardSize = house.yard?.sqft;
    ```
2. Nullish Coalescence: **'??'**

    - More like the ternary operator.
    - if null - data after ?? get executed.
    - if not null - data before ?? get executed.

    ```
    function printMileage(mileage: number | null | undefined) {
        console.log(`Mileage: ${mileage ?? 'Not Available'}`);
    }

    printMileage(null); // Prints 'Mileage: Not Available'
    printMileage(0); // Prints 'Mileage: 0'
    ```

3. Null Assertion: **'!'**
    - When you know that value won't be Null.
    ```
    function getValue(): string | undefined {
        return 'hello';
    }
    let value = getValue();
    console.log('value length: ' + value!.length);
    ```

##### 9.4.3 Use of Classes?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_classes.php)

1. Visibility:
2. ReadOnly:
3. Implement
4. Extends
5. Override
6. Abstract

##### 9.4.4 Use of Utility types?[(view)](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/typescript_utility_types.php)

1. Partial
2. Required
3. Record
4. Omit
5. Pick
6. Exclude
7. ReturnType
8. Parameters
